---
title: Lando v3.20.0 Extended Notes and Development Update
byline: Docker Compose 2, Healthchecks, Lando 3 Service and Lando 4 Service Preview
blog: true

path: 2023-09-25 12:00:00
updated:
  timestamp: 1695652126000

author:
  name: Mike Pirog
  pic: https://www.gravatar.com/avatar/dc1322b3ddd0ef682862d7f281c821bb
  link: /blog/tag/mike-pirog.html
  location: Washington, DC

tags:
  - lando
  - Mike Pirog
---

[Lando v3.20.0](https://github.com/lando/lando/releases/tag/v3.20.0) is one our bigger updates in recent memory. It

* _Finally_ switches over to use [Docker Compose CLI Version 2](https://docs.docker.com/compose/) for its service orchestration
* Introduces `api` as a `service` setting to prep for Lando 4 services being backported to Lando 3
* DEPRECATES the [compose service](https://docs.lando.dev/compose/) for a now-in-core `type: lando` service
* Makes the `healthcheck` a universal `service` setting
* Allows user to preview the new `L-337` Lando 4 services spec in Lando 3

It also contains the usual assortment of bug fixes and docs updates.

## 1. Docker Compose 2

Lando 3 will now use Docker Compose CLI 2 by default. This offers a noticeable speed improvement particularly for Apple Silicon users who were running Docker Compose CLI 1 under Rosetta-emulatation.

We have also made the orchestrator generally more configurable which you can read more about [here](https://docs.lando.dev/core/v3/orchestrator.html).

## 2. Service API

We've introduced an `api` setting to all `services`. This is automatically set to `3` if ommitted and you are running Lando 3.

The purpose of this setting is to allow users to try out new Lando 4 services as we backport them into Lando 3.

Consider the _currently only hypothetical_ and _functionally equivalent services_ in the example below:

**Landofile**
```yaml
services:
  appserver:
    api: 3
    type: php:8.0
    via: nginx
    webroot: www
    build_as_root:
      - apt-get update -y
      - apt install libxslt1-dev -y
      - pecl install stats-2.0.3
      - docker-php-ext-install xsl
      - docker-php-ext-enable stats
    config:
      php: ./config/php.ini
  runtime:
    api: 4
    type: "php:8.2"
    webroot: www
    extensions:
      - "xsl"
      - "stats"
    config:
      memory_limit: "512M"
```

## 3. Lando 3 Service

We've **DEPRECATED** the [compose service](https://docs.lando.dev/compose/) in favor of a new general purpose Lando 3 service which is built into Lando Core and can be used as such:

**Landofile**
```yaml
services:
  appserver:
    api: 3
    type: lando
    ...
```

This works more or less like the `compose` service but we've more exhaustively documented [all its features](https://docs.lando.dev/core/v3/lando-service.html) which _should_ be available in _every_ `api: 3` Lando service.

It's definitely worth checking them out.

## 4. Healthcheck

The `healthcheck` was previously available to only a special subset of Lando services and was not very well documented.

Now it is available in all `api: 3` services is [very well documented](https://docs.lando.dev/core/v3/healthcheck.html)

**Landofile**
```yaml
services:
  database:
    api: 3
    type: lando
    healthcheck:
      command: mysql -uroot --silent --execute "SHOW DATABASES;"
      user: mysql
      retry: 10
      delay: 1000
    services:
      image: mariadb:10.4
      command: docker-entrypoint.sh mysqld
```

## 5. Lando 4 Service Preview

As you may or may not know `api: 3` Lando services are basically a high level wrapper around service orchestration specificially with Docker Compose. This allows for a ton of flexibility and power but has many shortcomings as well.

For `api: 4` services Lando will continue to do service orchestration but will, crucially, build Dockerfile compatible images as well. This opens up a new world of possiblities for what Lando is capable of.

To that end we've completed the foundational `service` that will power all higher `api: 4` services. It's called the `l337` service because it implements **L**ando Specification **337** which combines service orchestration and image generation into a single config file.

It is the service that we will build the `type: lando, api: 4` service on top of, which means that by itself it does not add that "Lando Magix" but instead serves as a drop-in replacement for both Docker Compose and Dockerfiles generally. It looks something like this:

**Landofile**
```yaml
name: l337-preview
services:
  my-service:
    api: 4
    environment:
      HELLO: "there"
    command: "run-command"
    volumes:
      - "./start.sh:/usr/local/bin/run-command"
      - "my-data:/data"
    image:
      imagefile: |
        FROM nginx:1.21.6
        RUN useradd pirog
      tag: "pirog/nginx:powerman-5000"
      context:
        - "./folder"
        - "./folder:thing"
        - source: "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/SeaShanties/lyrics/main/available-shanties.json"
          dest: "/etc/config/available-shanties.json"
          owner: pirog
      groups:
        - tutone: 8675309
        - name: "user"
          weight: 10000
          user: "pirog"
      steps:
        - instructions: RUN echo "$LANDO_IMAGE_GROUP" > /tmp/val-jean-group
          group: "user"
        - instructions: |
            ENV VIBES RISING
            COPY my-script.sh /runme.sh
            RUN chmod +x /runme.sh
            RUN /runme.sh
          group: tutone-4-before
volumes:
  my-data:
```

Again, while it does not have that Lando Magix you can still [play around with it](https://docs.lando.dev/core/v4/services/l337.html) and check out some [example usage](https://github.com/lando/core/tree/main/examples/l337).

##  What's next for Lando?

### Development Pivot

In our [previous big dev update](https://lando.dev/blog/2023/01/23/roadmap-of-2023.html) we laid out a roadmap for 2023. As you may have already guessed and as is so often the case in development the roadmap has changed.

The `tl;dr` bad news is that Lando 4 is taking longer than we, or anyone, wants. The `tl;dr` good news is that we've completely backported the new Lando 4 Services API and the foundational `l337` service into Lando 3. This means that over the coming months we are going to start rolling out `api: 4` versions of all the current Lando services.

`api: 4` services will be significantly faster and more feature rich than their current `api: 3` counterpoints. We will likely release them in this-ish order:

* `lando` - a foundational and general purpose `api: 4` service.
* `mysql/mariadb/postgres` - these next for Apple Silicon users
* `php` - our most popular runtime
* `node` - our most popular utility service and second most popular runtime
* `all other services using bitnami images` - again for better Apple Silicon support
* `all other standalone services`
* `all hosting integration services`

As we roll out the above services we will be simultaneously finshing up the Lando 4 core `runtime` and `cli`.

_Ideally_ the `api: 4` services rollout completes at the same time Lando 4 ships a `beta` and users can then easily switch over their apps to the new `runtime`.

### Docker Desktop and Docker Engine refresh

The next minor Lando release will rework our underlying support for Docker Desktop and Docker Engine so that:

* Lando can install either directly if it needs to
* Both can be removed from our installer
* Both can be managed better
* Both can be run in different configurations eg non-root mode

### Lando Update

The next next minor Lando release will finally close our loop on breaking up the Lando monorepo and introduce a `lando update` command that you can run to update `@lando/core` and any of its plugins whenever they are updated.

In this model you install Lando once and then rely on `lando update`. You no longer have to wait for a huge infrequent core Lando release to get fixes and new features in just a single plugin.


